---
layout: post
title: Advanced Protocols in Taipei
headline: Currently traveling to Taipei to deliver two talks on advanced consensus protocols.
---

## Introduction

I'm writing this four hours into my fourteen hour flight from San Francisco to Taipei. The base of my 17" laptop fits snugly against
the seat in font of me, and as their seat is leaned back, I have to view my screen from a 60 degree angle. It's too dark to read 
my algorithms book, and I don't want to disturb my neighbors with a bright light, so I'm writing another blog post instead.

Although my trip to Taiwan has been planned since May, I was only introduced to the people who would later help me plan two technical
blockchain talks in Taipei until August. People within our campus organization had connections in Taipei who would be more than
happy to plan a blockchain event for us, and so it began from there. I'll be delivering a talk on two separate occaisons: once at a small
community meet-up at a large cafe (with a stage!) and once at Taipei's National Chengchi University. I am delivering the talk with one 
other teammate, who will be covering fundamental Bicoin mechanics before I move more in depth into advaced protocols. The layout of our talk

Bitcoin Fundamentals:
* Motivations
* Identity (Cryptography introduction)
* UTXO model
* Hash functions
* Record Keeping Model
* Proof-of-Work

Advanced Protocols:
* Distributed Systems 
* Consensus overview (Byzantine Generals, etc.)
* Proof-of-Stake
* Alternative Consensus


## My Interests

I'm deeply interested in the literature that supports the underlying mechanics of computer systems motivates me to understand
the design and implementation of distributed systems and the consensus protocols that are used to align incentive among public systems. 
What I spent the most time reading up on specifically:

* Properties of Distributed Systems
* Various Proof-of-Stake Implementation Tendermint and the two Caspers
    * Casper the Friendly Ghost (CTFG)
    * Casper the Friendly Finality Gadget (CTFFG)
    
## Properties of Distributed Systems

A distributed system is any set of processes (or nodes) that has the following characteristics:

^ Processes work together to achieve a common goal
* Processes communicate with each other by sending messages
* There is no global, synced clock
* Nodes may fail 